Hello, I'm Andrew Mayne, and this is the
OpenAI Podcast. Today, our guests are
researchers Sebastian Bubeck and Ernest
Ryu, and we're going to talk about math,
how it went from almost laughable to
Olympiad level, and why you need math to
reach AGI.
>> The progress of the last few years has
been nothing short of miraculous. We
will be able to have LLMs be able to
solve problems that require more than 50
pages of thinking. Mathematics was just
the perfect benchmark to see the model
making progress during the last 4 years.
>> Sebastian and Ernest, I'd love to know
more about you. So, how would you
explain your roles?
>> Yeah, sure.
So, I have been working in mathematics
for almost 20 years now.
I used to work in optimization and
theory of machine learning. I was a
professor at Princeton for a few years
before moving to Microsoft, and now I'm
a
researcher at OpenAI. And in the last
few years, I've been really trying to
understand how AI can help mathematics
and and to really evaluate the progress
that we're making in terms of solving
difficult math problems with AI.
>> Ernest, how about you?
>> Yeah, so I've recently joined OpenAI as
a researcher, but before that, I was an
applied mathematician working on
optimization and
machine learning theory.
And I was
in my previous job, I worked as a
professor of mathematics at the UCLA
math department.
>> So, I think a lot of people have this
perception that these models aren't good
at math, what are they called, language
models, and how has that changed? What's
going on?
>> Yeah, I think, you know, the progress of
the last few years has been nothing
short of miraculous.
It's important to remember that 2 years
ago, we didn't even have reasoning
models, let alone models that could
prove, you know, difficult mathematical
theorems. Today, 2 years later, the
models they are able to help Fields
Medalist in their day-to-day work. So,
really the the jump is is just simply
astounding. And maybe if I can build a
little bit more on that, um
something which is important to
understand is that everybody has been
surprised by this progress, including
us. So, to tell you a a story, um a year
and a half ago, I was at a workshop at
the conference with other fellow
mathematician, and there was a debate
that I participated in on whether LLM
scaling LLMs will help us resolve major
open problems. So, this was a debate,
you know, a year and a half ago, and and
the room was very divided. In fact, they
did a poll at the beginning, and I think
it was like 80% said no, impossible that
this would happen. So, then the debate
unfolded, and you know, by the end of
the debate it was more like 50/50. So,
you know, pretty pretty good progress
during that that hour. This, obviously,
was just so wrong in hindsight. Like,
just mere 8 months later, the model was
starting to be able to do research-level
mathematics.
>> What was the breakthrough moment for you
realizing that there was a really good
intersection between AI and mathematics?
>> So, summer of '25, the big news was uh
ChatGPT was able to achieve a top
human-level performance at the
International Math Olympiad, you know,
gold medal performance. Um so, that was
amazing news, and that demonstrated
that, well, at least for the
competition-level mathematics, the
models are capable of very highly
capable, um only um
on par with the the top human high
school
contestants.
Um but, uh
well, competition problems are canned
problems. Uh they have relatively short
solutions because they are meant to be
solved in it within a few hours, and
they're not novel because, well,
somebody came up with it as there's a
solution. So, it's not research-level
math. Um so, then I got curious, and a
lot of people got curious, can ChatGPT
do uh research-level mathematics? And
there was a lot of debate online, and
then I thought to myself, I I try it on
my own problem problems. Maybe I'll try
it for myself and make up my own minds
as opposed to me
listening to what other people say cuz
I'm a mathematician myself. So I took a
classical open problem in in
optimization theory, which is a a branch
of applied mathematics that I work on
work in.
And the question specifically is there's
a a famous algorithm called the Nesterov
accelerated gradient method and does
this have this conversion behavior or is
it possible that the
um for you know in in certain bad cases
can there be a certain divergent
behavior?
This question was was genuinely open in
the sense that
people know that in most cases the
algorithm behaves well, it's convergent,
but people really did not know like is
there a bad instance? Does it in the
worst case could it diverge? The answer
turned out to be yes. And the way I
discovered it is I remember it
distinctly. So so
my bedtime for my son is 8:00 p.m. And
then I tried not to stay awake after
midnight. So I had 4 hours of usually
evening hours to myself if I want to
focus on something. So I decided okay,
I'm going to spend a few days working on
this. So over the course of 3 days, so
that's 12 hours total. I interacted with
chat GPT on this question. It wasn't as
simple as me just putting in the prompt
and getting a solution. I played the
role of the the verifier. I told
whenever the model made a mistake,
I corrected it. I also tried to point
the conversation into areas that I felt
approaches that I felt were novel. And
after a while the proof
there was a proof and I checked it. I
also asked chat GPT to double check it
and it was correct. And that's how this
42-year-old open problem got resolved.
And once I got this
this solution,
I thought to myself what what be the
most fun thing for for me fun way for me
to publicize this cuz I could just write
a paper and that would be but that would
be less fun. So I decided, let me go to
Twitter and and talk about this.
And um
>> Dangerous, but yeah.
>> [laughter]
>> But uh well, I had a lot of fun. Yeah,
people paid
uh it was
I think one of the earliest instances of
genuinely open problem mathematical open
problem being solved by AI and um
and yeah, I mean people people like the
people ate it up and it was it was a lot
of fun.
>> It It is interesting that you brought
that up that we we've seen sometimes
people said, "Hey, I found something
cool or novel." And then sometimes it
gets torn apart. Sometimes it stands up.
And going into social media can be kind
of scary, but it sounds like we do need
these kind of feedback cycles. I think
part of the challenge for a lot of us is
we hear terms, you know, you hear like
the International Math Olympiad and
we're trying to figure out like, "Okay,
what does that mean from like a scale of
a problem?" You know, we like understand
addition, subtraction, multiplication.
Can you give me an example of
understanding like where we went from
from like, you know, first chat GPT
which could kind of sort of use it, then
it could do a could do math or could use
a tool, but then the model sort of
implicitly understanding that.
>> When chat GPT
you know, just entered the scene in in
20 20 early 2023, I I I started testing
the I was very curious about how the
model
is would perform fair on on
sort of common math problems. So so
these would include math problems that
you would see in like the high school
level, but but also like day-to-day like
math-ish problems. So for example,
imagine a scenario where we like the
three of us went to camping together and
then I paid for this I paid for this. Um
sorry. And and then Andrew you paid for
whatever and then we don't want to clear
the ledger and we want to split things
evenly at
at the end. Um can chat GPT do the
calculations for us? And this this is
moderately complicated if you have like
17 items that we purchased. In 2023,
2024 and also in 20 early 25, I
remember, uh the models couldn't do
this. Another example would be um uh I'm
in let's say in Korea, uh Seb's in
Paris, Andrew, you're in California, and
one is set up a Zoom meeting. Like, what
would be a good hour to do so? Um it
Uh again, one in early 25, the models
couldn't do this. But then just suddenly
things just um
changed. Uh and I wasn't in OpenAI at
the time, so I'm not at all I don't I'm
not quite privy to what exactly you you
did, but um suddenly the models started
solving IMO problems, and then uh
furthermore, it started solving research
problems. And
uh the way I sort of calibrate this
right now is that um unless you are a
professional mathematician trying to
discover new mathematics, um uh if you
are somebody who's like let's say a a
physicist or a chemist who who uses
relatively complicated mathematics like
differential equations, um things you
differential geometry, things like this,
but um but you're not inventing new
math,
then ChatGPT can do all of the math that
you would need. So, any basically user
of high-level mathematics it from STEM
can now use uh ChatGPT to basically have
their math taken care of. And you would
want to you want to exercise some some
degree of caution, you know, check the
check whether things are right, you
know, run simulations just to
double-check. The models can make
mistakes. But now um
any math problem that you would want to
solve, most people for 99% of the
population, the models can do it.
>> When I worked on the release of GPT-4, I
used scheduling as one of those
examples, and I could put three people
into a schedule and have it figure out
time slots, but pushing it beyond that,
that was really hard. Why Why did Was
there a change? So, Earnest just talked
about noticing all of this thing got
better. Now we know one thing was tool
use, you could let the model use a
calculator, but something else happened
with the models themselves.
>> So, going back to to to the debate that
I just told you about like the The
was really about can scaling alone,
scaling of LLMs alone bring you to, you
know, solving research
breakthroughs in in mathematics. And
this is a wrong framing. What we do at
OpenAI, we do a lot of research,
innovative research. It's not just about
scaling the model. So when you ask what
happened, or you know, when you you're
asking what happened middle of last year
when suddenly the model were able to
solve math problems, well, a lot of
things happened. We do a lot of research
and and all of this has to progress at
the same time. So I can't really point
to a single element.
>> But it was able to do it itself though
without the tools though.
>> Yeah, so I I I think it's it's really
really important to, you know, just
double down on what Ernest was saying
about the progress and, you know, the
scheduling problems that the model
wasn't able to do back then.
I said that 2 years ago we didn't have
reasoning models. Well, think about 4
years ago. 4 years ago, so this is
pre-ChatGPT, and I remember Google came
out with a mathematics model called
Minerva at the time. And I fell from my
chair. I was so impressed. What was I
impressed by? That the model I could
give it the coordinates of points in the
plane and it would give me a line that
goes through those points. Like when I
say that, you know, now it's it's almost
hard to understand. What are you talking
about? Obviously a model can do that. So
I think we we've kind of forgotten how
quickly things have happened. And now,
yeah, you know, Ernest was saying that
it it's basically at the point where
unless you're trying to invent new
mathematics, it's kind of at the right
[snorts] level already.
I would say we're already seeing
glimmers that even to invent new
mathematics, it's it's it's getting
there.
>> Could you break down though, aside from
somebody who's interested in developing
new fields of mathematics or just making
new proofs, it's
what does this affect everything else?
What is the impact of this going to be
on science? What is the impact of of the
rest of what you're working on,
why is this really important not just oh
cool it does math?
>> So I think there's a all cool it does
math part. What did matter as we were
developing those models as a good way to
benchmark the progress. The nice thing
about mathematics is that the question
are very clear, non-ambiguous, you know,
everybody agrees on what the question is
asking. So that's point number one.
Point number two, you can verify the
answer. So once the model can give an
answer, everybody will agree was it
correct or was it not correct. Although
you can put a pin on that because we
will talk about, you know, in research
level it's not that simple anymore to
evaluate. But before research level it's
very easy to evaluate. So mathematics
was just the perfect benchmark to see
the model making progress during the
last four years. Now we'd say we have
kind of saturated that aspect and and
you can ask okay now now okay fine the
models do mathematics, we have
understood
what what about the next steps. And for
the next step I would say that
having our models be good at mathematics
is going to be good for many many other
things and let me explain why.
A key feature of mathematics is that to
resolve a problem you have to think for
a long time.
Be it days, weeks, sometimes years.
So this long thinking, not only do I
have to think for a long time, but you
also have to think consistently for a
long time. If at some point in your
chain of reasoning there is a mistake,
this will kill the entire argument. It
doesn't matter if everything after that
is correct. If there is one single
failure point, everything the entire
argument is destroyed. So this property
makes it that this is what you want out
of reasoning models. That if they make
mistakes, they will be able to correct
themselves. So we are hoping that these
properties that they acquire through
mathematics will generalize to other
domain. Which by the way is exactly the
same thing with human beings. Why do we
train human beings in mathematics? I
mean it's a very fun topic. I love it.
We did it professionally. Uh maybe we
still do some of it a little bit.
Uh
but what what do we train humans in
mathematics? Exactly for the same
reason. It gives you this kind of very
logical thinking.
>> Do we need to think about new ways to
talk about these discoveries?
>> Yeah, so I I personally view it
a little bit as as part of my role to
try to to educate the research community
about the recent advances
because I I have this, you know, dual
background of both being a former
mathematician and and now working on the
on the frontier of AI and and indeed
like Twitter and social media is a great
place to to try to explain what is the
progress in particular because this
progress is so fast. So, you know, for
example, I I I maybe we can talk a
little bit about the Erdos problems.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, and and and and some of the
controversies that happen
around that. So,
there was a first example. So, there was
first, you know, earnest example and
then there were a few other problems
that were solved.
>> explain Paul Erdos though, too, just so
I think people would love to know who he
is and why his problems are sort of
interesting.
>> Yeah, of course. So, Paul Erdos is one
of the most prolific mathematician of
the last century. He has written, I
think, 1,500 research paper. He was a
very iconoclastic figure, you know, he
didn't have a house or an apartment. He
was just traveling from one university
to the next trying to find new
collaborators and every time he would go
to a place and basically ask question.
He was very very very gifted at asking
question. Not all the question that he
asked were interesting. Let me just say
that right away. But still it was very
productive and you know, they the
research community wrote a lot of papers
with him. There is even this concept of
an Erdos number which is, you know, how
far away are you in a chain of
collaborators from having also a paper
with with Erdos.
My Erdos number is is two. I I
co-authored a paper with someone who
co-authored with Erdos. So, you know,
yeah, I'm pretty happy about that.
>> My number is three.
>> Oh.
>> [laughter]
>> The joke was, you know, you could be on
a train ride with him and then by the
end of the train ride you'd maybe work
on a paper with him and have your name
>> Absolutely. Absolutely. I think the two
versus three basically says something
about our respective age.
>> [laughter]
>> It's actually what it says. So anyway,
so Erdos has you know all of these
problem and and there is a
very nice website by Thomas Bloom who is
keeping track of all the Erdos problems
that are still open.
>> Mhm.
>> So I think there is like a thousand
problem or something like that on that
website. And Thomas himself has done the
work of trying to find, you know, he's
an expert in combinatorics so he can
kind of say, okay, this is open, this
is, you know, resolved, this has some
complicated status, you know, for every
every problem. Of course he doesn't
necessarily know the answer to all of
them. So if there is a paper which is
marked open, it is not necessarily true
that nobody knows
>> Mhm.
>> how to solve it. But it is also a very
interactive website where people can go
on it and you know, add comments to
every problem and explain whether there
is a solution, etc. So it's a very
dynamic great website. So of course once
we started to have GPT be able to solve
research math problem, this sounded like
a treasure trove
of problem to try our models on.
And
we tried a a couple and to our great
surprise the model came back with
answers to some of them that were marked
as open. So we got really excited about
this. So the first one, you know, that I
tweeted about, I don't remember when it
was, maybe it was in October or
something like that
last year. It was a deep literature
search result. So let me explain what
that means. It means that what GPT did
is that it did a vast literature search
trying to scan, you know, thousands of
papers and it found in some unrelated
field the answer to the question. Now
it's really important to understand that
it's not like in that, you know,
unrelated field the person said, okay,
I'm solving an Erdos problem. It was
written in a completely different
language. It was different mathematics.
You have to do work to connect the two
pieces, and GPT did that. So, that was
kind of amazing. And And this was very
ad hoc. Like, you know, we just tried by
hand basically in the ChatGPT interface.
Once we saw that, um Mark Sellke, who
is, you know, in in our team, also
decided to have a more systematic
approach of trying all of the problems.
And he tried that, and the model came
back with solutions to 10
Erdős problems. And this was you have to
remember at that point there was still,
I think, a very dynamic discussion about
whether, you know, those models could go
beyond the state of the art and
discover, invent new mathematics.
So, I I got very excited about
this this result, and and and I tweeted
about it. And And, you know, it's kind
of an infamous tweet because people
misunderstood it as kind of saying it
really found the solution to 10 open
problems that are very hard, and the
solution is completely new and did not
exist in the literature. But that's not
what happened. It was connected, of
course, to the previous case, where it
is a deep literature search. So, there
was some, you know, feud with with
Google about you know, with Endemics
about whether, you know, this is uh the
right way to talk about such results.
But now, the the punchline is kind of
amazing, which is
a few months later. So, again, I said 10
solutions to open problems, and these
were solutions in the literature. And
then the question is, can you find
solutions that are not in the
literature? By now, we have more than 10
actual solutions that are completely
new, that are publishable in top journal
in combinatorics, completely obtained
by, you know, some by ChatGPT and some
by our internal models. So, just within
Again, this this really speaks to the
acceleration. In the span of just a few
months, we went to It's kind of a
ridiculous statement to say that there
would be 10 solutions to Erdős problems.
To It's actually happening for real and
it's accelerating.
>> Yeah, it's generic cuz it seems like
that, you know, step one is have models
be able to do really good literature
research and
there have been major papers and awards
done given to people who've just done
literature searches and found the
solution was solved here and it actually
applies elsewhere. So,
it's neat that you it does that as the
first step, but now that it's actually
doing original
>> you know,
the one thing that they really like
about AI research is that it forces us
to confront big questions about
intelligence and about, you know,
research and and and progress and how do
we discover new things. In particular,
there is this question of whether the
progress that we're seeing in science,
is it just putting together different
pieces and, you know, doing a little bit
of reasoning on top of it? Or are there
those brilliant, you know, sparks of
insight? Everybody, of course, points to
Einstein's, you know, relativity. I'm
I'm not even sure that really counts, to
be honest. So, I think the jury is still
out on whether this process of just
recombination and a little bit of
thinking, whether you can kind of
increase, you know, human knowledge with
with no limit or do you really need the
sparks of genius that would be somehow
only human?
>> Well, even he credited, I forgot who it
was, but who came up with the, you know,
the analogy, the visualization method.
You know, he said it wasn't his, but
pointed out who did it and he kind of
took it to the next step further,
obviously. And I think that we sometimes
we love these tiny little stories when
it's a lot more complex than that.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
>> What will it mean for sciences in
general if we have better mathematical
tools in AI? How does it affect other
things, biology, material science?
>> Yeah, so again, how how it affects the
the rest of science, well, the point is
uh I think it's really important for
everybody to understand. It's not like
we're doing something very, very special
for mathematics.
>> Mhm.
>> Our techniques, our training techniques
are very general. They they are applied
to everything. So, our expectation is
that we are seeing more progress in
mathematics,
well, one reason is because it's very
easy to benchmark. It's very easy to see
that progress. But we have full
expectation that this is going to happen
in all sciences. It's not going to be
limited to mathematics.
>> Yeah, it seems like something that's
very good at going if this is true and
then this is true and going through a
long sequence of those kinds of
statements has a lot of applications
elsewhere. We've heard the term auto
researcher.
Do you want to pack that a bit?
>> Right now, the the way we we work is
exactly what Ernest described, which is
really an interaction. It's It's kind of
a professor-student interaction where
ChatGPT is a student and the professor
is kind of, you know, giving a
a first problem and the student comes
back and then they talk a little bit.
The student goes away for another week,
comes back. One point, of course, is
that it's compressing those timelines
greatly. In Ernest's story, you know, of
solving this problem in 12 hours. I
mean, I don't know, without ChatGPT, how
long would it have taken you?
>> Well, I have spent more than 40 hours
failing
>> [laughter]
>> without without AI and I don't know,
maybe a month.
>> Right.
>> Yeah.
>> So So, exactly. So, you know, there is
this this thing of just compressing
timelines. Now, when we talk about the
automated researcher, that's a slightly
different vision where the model or
maybe a collection of model would work
autonomously for long period of time.
This is kind of needed if we want to go
beyond the current level. The current
level of interaction, you know, the
professor-student interaction where the
student comes back after a week, it's
going to be very hard with that mode of
interaction to do real breakthroughs. To
solve actually long-standing, you know,
research problems or to make problem
progress in in, you know, very difficult
fields in biology where you need to
interact, you know, with the wet lab and
do all kinds of experiments. So, once
you want to go towards a real
breakthrough,
we will need to work over longer
timelines and this is where the
automated researcher comes in. Maybe let
me say it in a in a slightly different
way. One one concept that I'm a big fan
of is this concept of AGI time. So you
can have AGI seconds, minutes, hours,
days, and so on. So that really means
you have an AI and for like it can mimic
human thinking, but for how long? So as
Ernest was saying, you know, 2 years
ago, maybe models were mimicking, you
know, a high school student who thinks
for a few minutes on a problem. Now we
can mimic a researcher who can think for
hours, maybe a few days. We really want
to go towards and this progress has been
going on for now, you know, very
consistently for 4 years where we went
literally from seconds to minutes to
hours to days and now we are roughly at
days / 1 week. We want to go to weeks if
not months.
This is open research. You know, I I
don't think anyone on the planet knows
exactly how to do it. But this goes back
to we are doing a lot of research, a lot
of innovation and I think once
everything will be put together, we're
just seeing this arc of progress where
we keep making progress in AGI time. But
this is this is the direction of the
automated researcher.
>> So the people the other mathematicians
that I, you know, talk to their mode of
using AI is they open up ChatGPT and
then they talk to ChatGPT within that
context window. And you can have
multiple sessions, but each session has
a
a finite context length. And roughly
on the order of like 50 pages of a math
paper. Um and that's not long enough to
make true like deep a math
groundbreaking math breakthroughs
because a lot of math papers are longer
than 50 pages. And also the the thought
the human's thought that went into to
produce that say a 10 or 30 page paper
is usually well much orders of magnitude
longer than the final output.
Um so there's a limitation with the the
limited context when window. But
for users but people who have used Codex
will will know that you can actually
have very long work sessions with Codex.
So you just keep you know giving
instructions as to what kind of code you
want to write and then the code itself
that you're working on the repository of
of your code which in the math sense the
analogy would be that would be analogous
to like math notes that you write down.
That can be very very very long. Um but
Codex has a is is pretty good at dealing
with that. It it it once in a while it
compactifies its contact its its
conversations um and it has its way and
becoming this really um amazing agent
that can do really complex jobs over
huge repositories of code over a long
really long context of conversation. Um
and this
uh
I believe is going to happen with
mathematics research as well. So we will
be able to have LLMs be able to solve
problems that are longer than just you
know that require more than 50 pages of
thinking. And that's what humans do
that's what human mathematics
mathematicians do. We people think for a
day on a certain problem and then we
kind of summarize our ideas and then put
it into notes. The next day or the next
week we come back to it and then over
several months we've thought for so so
long but
it's sort of summarized it's sort of
organized in a way that becomes
manageable and in the end the final
output becomes a 30-page paper
that summarizing the thoughts over you
know many many months or even years. So
yeah I think that's going to happen.
>> I was working on a a very very laughable
problem to you guys over the weekend and
using an LLM to try to do it to figure
out like how to use a really small LLM
to do math. In the middle of it I needed
a benchmark and I came across easy math
which is a benchmark for small LLMs. And
problem is just a paper on it there
wasn't really a lot of data and I just
in the middle of Codex I go can you
create my own benchmark here and just
generate the data for that. And 5
minutes later I had it. And that was
magical to me because I'm in the middle
of working on the tool that would have
involved me all of a sudden, okay, I got
to spend a few hours to go do a
generator, go produce this sort of
stuff.
>> Absolutely.
>> And it runs in the background. I can't
imagine what it's like for you guys
doing grown-up problems.
>> Yeah, I mean, what you described is
really, you know, what what we went
after when when we published the paper
whose title was
early experiments in science
acceleration
with GPT-5. Like we what you have
experienced is is literal acceleration.
Like this is something that would have
taken you before, I don't know, maybe a
few days of work or something.
>> have given up.
>> Yeah.
Yeah, so that that is that's actually a
great point. You know, I would have
given up. This really enables scientists
everywhere, like for example,
mathematicians to be able to use code.
Most of our friends, they don't code,
you know? And now suddenly they have
code X, they can do all the experiments
that, you know, before they were trying
to find a poor grad student to do the
experiment for them. Now they can do all
of these experiments very easily.
The the flip side is of course like that
scientists in all the disciplines, they
can also use more advanced mathematics
now thanks to ChatGPT.
>> I I sat down with Bob Metcalfe and
showed him how to use code X to do R. He
was working on a project and R was new
to him and he wanted to learn that.
>> Yeah.
>> And that was kind of a funny experience
to take somebody who's got a great mind
and say, "Oh, here's instead of spending
a lot of time having to figure this out,
there's the tool for you."
>> But of course now as you alluded to
before, we should talk about the role of
the human in in all of this. What is the
place for the human, especially if we
start to think about, you know, let's
think a little bit about the future. I I
I'm I'm not a big fan of trying to
predict the future. I like to explain
what I do.
>> But what do you think will happen?
>> [laughter]
>> Um
I think
I think, you know, there is what my
heart tells me and there is the rational
aspect. So the the what what my head
tells me is, "Look, the progress
has been happening, you know, very
consistently for the last 4 years. From
being able to solve math problems that
would take you seconds to minutes to
hours to days,
I there's no reason I anybody would look
at the situation would say, "Okay, a
year from now you will have systems that
can think for weeks. 2 years from now,
systems that can think for, you know,
years."
Not only that, but already today we're
finding that our models they are able to
really surpass humans in the sense that
they can find mistakes in papers.
>> Mhm.
>> You know, we had system we had agents
that internally that have been able to
come up with to to find papers and say,
"Hey, actually this is wrong. Here is
the correct answer." Not only that, but
people start tend to think that
um AI is only good at answering
questions.
Actually, no, it's also pretty good at
asking questions. Of course, you need to
be, you know,
you Again, you need some research
innovation there, which we had. And now
our models are very good at asking
questions. So good in fact that humans
are looking at those questions and
saying, "Hey, maybe I should write a
paper based on this question." So so
this is, you know, really really already
happening now. So I think what I'm
trying to say is that
in a year, in 2 years, yes, models could
do basic more or less everything that
human researchers do.
So now what? What is the role of humans?
Well, why is it that we're doing
science? What's the point? You know, the
point is not to I mean
I I I I think it shouldn't be to just
solve problem for for the fun of solving
problem. We're solving problems because
we're trying to understand something.
The understanding piece is key. We're
not solving problems to write papers, to
show to say that we can write, you know,
10 times more papers than than our
neighbor. That's not That's not the
point. There, you know, you can do
competitive chess if that's if that's
your your kind of deal. We're trying to
really understand deeper things.
And why are we trying to understand
deeper things? Because we want to have
better control over our environment. We
want to be able to cure diseases. We
want to be able to build things, you
know, better, faster, more robust, more
solid, all of those things. So, I think
we there is a chance that
we're looking at a very, very bright
future using those tools as long as the
human stays in control and guides what
are the problems that matters.
Problems that, you know, the AI doesn't
care about curing disease. I mean, you
know, they will not suffer from the same
disease as we do, but we do care. So, we
have to control them and to guide them
towards those problems.
>> At the time of the advent of the first
computers, when the computer went from
being a person that did the math to an
actual machine that did it, you saw some
people looking at maybe we all have to
move from math to physics because that's
where the hard problems are going to be
and there's not going to be any more
hard problems in mathematics cuz
computers resolve that. And that was the
1940s and 1950s, and it turned out that
that's not the case. The computation
opened up a whole new branch of that.
And that's what's going to continue,
that we're just going to see that the
mathematician that's in high school
today is going to have a very exciting
future 30 years from now because of
what's happening here.
>> I think math is going to be so much fun.
So,
>> [laughter]
>> Okay, so math is So, mathematicians
enjoy solving problems, but
you know,
pre-AI, you know, we would think for
months to solve a problem and that's
there's enjoyment in that, but there's
it's quite grueling and
>> There is pain.
>> There is pain, too.
>> There is a lot of pain.
And there is a huge like there is a
surge of dopamine when you actually find
the solution.
That's going to be accelerated. So, you
know, more solutions, more fun. But
also, I think math is going to become
much more richer because
it's going to be much more
interconnected. Because there is a lot
of at research level, a lot of math is
hyper niche. And when you write the
paper, you know that there are only five
living humans right now that will care
about this paper. But you like the
results, so you put you put it put it
out. And then the five other people
appreciate it, so they they read it. But
then, you know, 20 years later, it's
going to well, it's going to be in the
archive somewhere, and nobody will read
it.
But now that we have AI, the AI will
have read it. And if there is a useful
connection
>> Yeah.
>> uh as as Sebastian mentioned, it will
surface it. And then people people, you
know, 100 years down the line will
discover it and use it for whatever they
want to use. So there's I would now have
much more confidence that my results
that are just like that I just put out
there will be used if there is a use in
the in in the future. And also, I I'm
now able to access the mathematics in a
much broader way. There are fields that
I've not studied, but you know, if a
result comes up, then I would still have
to study that field to be able to um use
that particular result in my research.
But there is no way I could have found
that result without the assistance of
AI, but now it's accessible. The model
tells me, "Hey, you can use this to
solve your problem." And then, well,
okay, I'll go and try to try to use
that. So math is going to be a much more
interconnected enterprise. And also,
verifying correctness of of mathematics
is actually quite non-trivial. Because
imagine there's a proof written by some,
you know, some somebody
that's it's it's 300 pages long, and it
it claims to solve a really important
problem. And this person is a very
reputable person, so like there's there
and and the paper at at surface looks,
you know, plausible. How do you know?
Well, I mean, this these are this is a
process that takes years to to verify.
And it's also not enough that one person
reads it. Many people need to read it
read it, and then
try to extend it, and then look into the
details. This is a process that take it
takes years. And sometimes um
like fatally incorrect proofs are are
published. So that's also a very slow
process where the field initially
accepts a result but later on discovers
that it's unsalvageable. So then it
needs to get filtered out. This is going
to be so much more accelerated with with
AI. So right now ChatGPT and our AI
models are not perfect at verifying
mathematics, but it's very good. And
also it has much more patience than than
humans. [laughter]
>> Yeah.
>> So the truth is so much of the published
mathematics have minor mistakes and some
a lot of them do have major mistakes and
and we know because we have tested these
things
with our models. But now I think the the
more richer future of mathematics is
that this will be
through AI verification. We will have
much more certainty as to which results
are correct, which results are
incorrect. And we'll have a much faster
feedback on this. The paper published a
put out a week ago, we could get a
verification on that and then we could
trust and build on that as opposed to
waiting for 5 years to really ascertain
the correctness. So it's overall it's
math is going to be much more fun. It's
going to be much more interconnected.
We'll
it'll be
we'll be able to trust the results more.
We'll be able to move faster. And the
mathematicians will solve harder and
more interesting problems.
>> So maybe maybe one thing that I want to
add so I totally agree with everything
that you just said. It's it's it's going
to be a a lot of fun, but
I I I want also to talk about one
potential danger of of the current
progress. Which would be that we kind of
hand the keys to the castle to to the
AIs. And that human just start to trust
those system a lot more and that they
don't do the hard work that we, you
know, kind of did to own our skills and
to own our skills to to be able to
verify and to sit patiently, you know,
for hours, you know, many days in a row
or many weeks in a row to try to
understand deeply a result and instead
just kind of ask ChatGPT to explain it
to us in a in in simpler terms. So,
basically, I'm worried about potentially
having a shallower understanding of
things because we rely too much on the
tool. So, I think it's really important
for the audience, for everyone listening
to us, to understand that expertise is
even more valuable than it ever was. The
reason why we are able to, you know,
squeeze out those results from ChatGPT
is because of all of those years of
training and our deep understanding of
the subject. If it wasn't for that, we
would not be able to push the state of
the art. And we're seeing it. It's not
like we're seeing, you know, thousands
of people like non-mathematicians
suddenly being able to to prove new
result. In fact, if anything, we have
seen recent examples in in social media
where non-mathematicians have tried to
use those tools to prove theorem and and
come up with, you know, many tens of
pages of of of proof and then it turns
out to be just wrong.
>> Mhm.
>> So, so this is a danger that we have to
grapple with.
>> It it seems like that's
going to be a problem in a lot of
things. So, you see people spend, you
know, using current models that often
just reinforce things you want to hear
and that can be kind of your, you know,
I'm going to come up with some sort of
unified theory or whatever. Like, well,
guess what? That's going to be a lot
harder.
>> Yeah, I mean, this sort of issue of
mental sort of atrophy, if you will, is
also, I think, very prominent in coding
as well. So, I mean, I I'm not a, you
know, I wasn't a computer science major,
but I took some computer science courses
and I I did I I coded myself. I, you
know, wrestled with a debugger and most
people of my age did. But, nowadays, you
don't have to do that in in your
university curriculum and I think that's
very dangerous.
>> I've heard some people in the sciences
who look at the progress are very
optimistic. Like, well, we're not going
to need scientists. We're not going to
need this anymore.
>> No.
>> Yeah, no. Wow, this is terrible.
>> [laughter]
>> Uh so, really, I want to make sure
anybody listening, please do Do say
that. This is the opposite of what we
need. We need more scientists than ever.
The scientists are going to be more
productive, more powerful, they will do
better things, but we need them to be
really, really good at their craft. And
I think this is where, you know,
obviously OpenAI cannot do everything,
you know, just to to to say it out loud.
And this is where the existing
institution have a very big role to
play. So, academia needs to both
understand the the the rate of progress
and you know, how fast this is going,
but also to kind of reclaim their role
in in that process.
>> Yeah, my hope and expectations we're
going to see more people going into the
sciences because
if you decide later on in life that you
want to get into this, it's easier to
catch up if you're dedicated because you
have the greatest tutor in the world,
OpenAI just added it to ChatGPT can has
has a visual explanation tool now that
helps you explain things. And I think
that people,
you know, just because all of a sudden
AI model is able to, you know,
completely top out, you know, a
benchmark, doesn't mean that you go,
"Okay, we're done. We We We We solved
grade school math. Congratulations,
everybody. AI's done." It's like, "No,
there's a next level and the next level
and you're going to need people."
>> No, I think it will help, I mean, the
young generation to get up to speed in
science like so much more quickly,
that's for sure. Like I I cannot imagine
if I had ChatGPT, you know, as a
teenager. I mean, I remember looking at
Maxwell equation and being like, "What
does it really mean? Well, how did they
come up with this stuff?" Now, you can
just ask it and it will explain it to
you so beautifully. It It's a big deal,
but you still need to do the hard work
on top of it.
>> Though, with a lot more people trying to
create mathematical proofs who don't
know what they're doing and who aren't
really maybe putting in the right
scholarship to make sure of that, we've
seen areas of code repos and whatnot and
people contributing fixes that aren't
real fixes and things like this. How do
you solve for that? If If I'm somebody
who's involved in mathematics or a
journal right now, I'm a little bit
terrified.
>> Yeah, so I think what Anna said is that,
you know, AI can help also for that. So,
we can have on the other side of it of
those systems to have AI agent that are
also going over everything trying to
verify as much as possible. And then,
again, we do not want to trust fully the
AI to verify and to accept a paper or to
accept a commit, but we can have the AI
agent flagging specific potential
issues. So, kind of bringing to the
front, okay, hey, maybe this this part
that I'm not totally about it. So, that
will accelerate that that will help, you
know, the human to have less to verify,
basically.
>> And I think um the the sort of social
structure of mathematics or, you know,
code, it has to
change a little bit in a way that the
human doing the commit or human
controlling the agent takes
responsibility. So, in mathematics there
already is a culture of, well, if you
put out a incorrect proof, then well,
that's that that it hurts your
reputation. And you're putting your
reputation on your line on the line when
you put out a paper with your name. Um,
and that has to I think we need more of
that.
>> If you're mathematically curious and
somebody's watching this or listening
and they maybe have an interest in math,
but maybe they didn't feel they were a
math person, but they're kind of curious
to get started, what would you tell
them?
>> Go chat with ChatGPT.
>> [laughter]
>> If you are interested in learning, then
it's so helpful. Like even at the
research level, when I need to learn a
new concept, I would
habitually go to Wikipedia and then it's
just very dense. And I'm like, okay,
well, after like 30 seconds I I go,
okay, let me ask ChatGPT. And then I ask
it and then I also ask follow-up
questions. And and when I do so, it it
gives me so much so much more helpful
information that is tailored to the the
parts of my knowledge that is missing
cuz I'm asking the questions tailored
towards that. Um, and you could you
could imagine explaining to ChatGPT your
mathematical background, the the
the things that you the books that
you've read, the the material that
you've learned.
Um, and then ask it to come up with a
question that uh uh is would be open and
also would be uh
understandable with your level of
expertise. Sebastian mentioned this. I
think you know, people I don't think
people yet appreciate that uh these LLMs
are able to come up with good questions,
but I think they can. So, having this
companion that you can talk talk uh
talk about math with uh and uh have talk
talk about questions. You could ask them
to help you solve it and uh once you
have a solution then you could keep
talking and
come up with the next question, you
know, variations of this.
Uh it it's becomes a much more
um even though you're still in your room
alone, it it it feels much less of a
solitary process and that that's what
really makes uh mathematics uh fun
because math, I think it really is a
social endeavor.
>> Absolutely.
>> I think toy problems are fun and and I I
tell people you can start with like,
"How many M&M's can you fit in your
bathtub?"
It sounds silly and you start to ask you
like then you go, "How many words did
you read last year?" How would you
figure this out? And then you can start
to have this real wonderful conversation
and start asking these questions. Next
thing you know, you're starting to do
more and more complex mathematics and
realize how much it affects you.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh gentlemen, this is great. Sebastian,
Ernest, thank you very much.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you for having us.